[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this is the
first of a couple of videos where we're going to
introduce some basic and fundamental concepts from
linear algebra into this a linear space context
that we've introduced a kind of a basic elementary
way of thinking about linear algebra over the
integers okay so the basic object was what we
call the I span of an M set an M set of M sets so
we have a B and C which are M sets multi sets and
we're taking the integral linear span of them what
does that mean it means that we're considering
combinations of these three M sets just additive
combinations K times a plus L times B plus M
times C where our coefficients are allowed to
be arbitrary integers so this kind of thing is
called an integral linear combination it gives
us integral coefficients and these kinds of things
are the objects which are of this type that they
belong to I span of a B and C okay and this is a
very general situation this works to define I span
of M for any M set of M sets M okay and it gives
us really an M set foundation for linear algebra
that we're going to explore today particularly
with the respect to these very interesting and
important concept of bases and dimensions for
these I linear spaces these I linear spaces
that we've so introduced are essentially the same
thing as vector spaces or linear spaces in linear
algebra except for the fact that we're not working
over a field we're working over a more restricted
domain of coefficients namely the integers but
other than that it's pretty well exactly the
same kind of story so here is a summary of the
basic properties that our eye span of M satisfies
okay so we pick a multi set of multi sets m and
we consider that I span of M and we suppose that
we have UV and W let's say which are an i span
of M that means they are linear combinations
of whatever multi sets are inside M and we all
suppose that we have a couple of integers m and
n all right and then the rules are very much like
the rules that we had for a span of M except now
there's a little bit of extra business because
we also have negation of vectors or objects so
we have the associative law of addition which is
just the associative law of adding multi sets we
have commutativity of addition we have zero plus
u equals u where zero is the empty set or empty
multi set and now we have the fact that u plus
minus u is 0 0 is again this thing here and what
is minus u well minus u is just the negation of an
am set so all of these things are M sets because
all of the things that we're considering are am
sets and we know how to take the negative of a
multi set it's minus 1 times that multi set and
that just means that we're taking the antes of all
the elements of you money that's how we take the
negative of a multi set in this sort of expanded M
set universe that we have now because we have
the ante operation right the ante operation
exactly allows us to talk about the negative of
a multi set and allows us to do this more general
arithmetic involving not just additions but also
subtractions as well and then over here various
laws about how the the multiplicative scalar
multiplication of the objects by the numbers
works so if we have the number N and we have these
two multi sets U and V then n times u plus V is n
times u plus n times V and if we have to numbers n
plus M times you that's the same as n times u plus
M times u so two different kinds of distributive
laws and here's a sort of an associative law for
scalar multiplication we have you here we multiply
by M and then multiply that by n that's the same
as taking you and multiplying it all together by
n times M and if we multiply u by the number one
then we get u and if we multiply u by the number
zero then we get zero so I think it's interesting
that we have the essentials of the vector space or
linear space story if you look in linear algebra
books these are pretty well exactly the axioms
are sometimes called very unfortunate notation
but this is really the definition of a vector
space or a linear space with the proviso that
usually the numbers that are considered are not
integers but rather more general rational numbers
or real numbers okay but otherwise algebraically
it's it's really the same thing okay so now let's
introduce the important idea of a spanning set or
a spanning M set for an i linear space so we're
going to assume that we have a linear space I
span of M M is an M set of M sets we say that
an M set N is a spanning M set for this I linear
span precisely when I span of n equals I span of
M when n itself also spans exactly the same space
as we already have okay so an example here is an M
set it's actually an M set of M sets because there
is an M set right there and there's another M set
right there and I hope you can recognize that
this M set here is actually a vector because
what's inside it are a bunch of Singleton's this
is also excellent what's inside it is also a bunch
of Singleton's in fact only one singleton so
here we have two vexos inside this m set m so i
span of M is just the span of these tube axles
all possible linear combinations with integer
coefficients of these tube axles okay so maybe
we're now interested in finding some examples of
spanning sets for this I linear space so here are
three candidates k is the multi set consisting of
a vector with two zero Singleton's and another
vector with a single one singleton here's an M
set which consists of the singleton zero and the
singleton one and here's an M set that consists
of a Veck sole containing a singleton zero and
here another vessel that contains a singleton
one notice these are somewhat different things
they're sort of different layers involved here
okay so which of these are going to be spanning
if which if any are going to be spanning M sets
for this thing here well how about the first one
if we take the span of these things I'm going to
get the same thing as the span of those things
well note that this thing is exactly the same as
that and this thing is almost the same as that the
only difference is that this one has an additional
single to the one in it so notice that if we take
this M set and this am set and we add them then
we're going to get this one here so this one here
is sum of these two and this one is just this one
here now that means that anything that we can
create as a linear combination of these two we
can in fact also get as a linear combination of
these two because another way of saying is that
the difference between this one and this one would
take this one we subtract that one we're gonna get
exactly this one here all right so yes this is an
example of something that that spans I span of M
help of this thing here well the M sets inside
here are not even of the kind of objects that
are appearing in I span of M I span of M consists
of vexos and the vexos are M sets of Singleton's
here we only have Singleton's so if we take sums
of these things we're going to get things of the
form you know we don't get M sets with numbers
inside them but not with Singleton's inside them
so these objects inside here are not of the right
kind and this is not going to work how about this
one this one we do have objects which are the
same kind in fact this one here that bec still
is the same as that one there and this one here is
almost the same as this one here except there's a
single singleton zero instead of two singleton
zeros now what happens if we take I span of n
we're gonna get all the vessels that we can get
by adding these two what we're going to get is
something that's a little bit bigger than I span
of M we're going to get I span of M so everything
that's a linear combination of these is also
a linear combination of those because this one
here is just this one plus this one plus this one
but this element right here the single BEC so with
just a single singleton zero cannot be written
as a linear combination of these two no matter
what combination of these two you take you're
always going to have an even number of singleton
zeros so the spans are not the same even though
they're reasonably close that is not a spanning
set all right let's make the following relatively
simple observation that if n is a spanning am set
for I span M then n actually must be an M set of
M sets the that's what we require in order to get
actually an ice pan of n being defined and each
of its elements must belong to ice pan M so the
actual ingredients or the elements of n the things
inside and that we're going to be taking linear
combinations of they have to be in here because
each one of them separately is going to belong to
here so we can't be taking and to be consisting of
objects which are completely separate from I span
of M it's basically we're looking inside I span
m and choosing some elements inside I spent m to
try to find a spanning M set and a rather trivial
observation is that M itself is a spanning M set
for I span M because obviously the I span of M
equals the I span of M okay now a very important
definition in linear algebra the minimal size of
a spanning M set for I span M is its dimension
so if we have one of these I linear spaces what
we do to find its dimension is we look for the
smallest possible size of a spanning set for it
the smallest possible size of a spanning set is
the dimension of the I linear space and now the
second important definition a basis for I span M
is a spanning M set say B of the minimal size
we've said that the dimension is the smallest
possible size of a spanning set for I span of M
and if we have a spanning set of that smallest
possible size that spanning set will be called a
basis for i span M now finding the dimension and a
basis of an i linear space these are fundamental
tasks so given an i linear space very natural
question is what is this dimension and another
very natural question is what is a basis for
that a linear space and notice that I say a basis
and not the basis because there will definitely be
more than one basis so a basis is not unique there
are lots of different bases as we'll see okay but
at least getting your hands on one is already
a very good accomplishment that means that you
understand the space in a very tangible way okay
so while the dimension is unique bases are not and
I note that the plural of basis is base C's so
one basis two bases three bases but some bases
are more convenient or useful than others and
that's a theme in linear algebra to look at a
particular situation to try to find a basis which
is the most congenial for whatever you're doing so
we're going to be working a little bit with some
examples here as we like to do and in order to
make that as smooth as possible and in order for
us to pleasantly match up at least somewhat with
standard treatments I want to introduce a little
bit of notational convention that will sort of
bridge the gap from the way we're thinking about
things em set oriented wise to more traditional
vector space kind of terminology okay so a very
important kind of M set for us is a Vexen okay
especially in the context of these.i linear spaces
they are very natural and and green useful kinds
of examples so here for example is a Veck so it's
actually an interval back so it's actually an
integral vessel from integers let's have a look at
it there's a singleton minus 1 there's another one
of those and then there's three singleton zeros
and here's an anti singleton - okay now we know
that we can write this thing down alternatively in
sort of a frieze notation by recording the number
of zero Singleton's in sort central box so put a
three there and then one over to the left that'd
be the number of minus one Singleton's one over to
the right the number one Singleton's which there
aren't any and over here this minus one represents
the fact that we have a Anti singleton - okay so
this is all very nice okay but using a green strip
and these bars over it like that is suggestive but
it's not typographically always very convenient
so we want to have some alternatives so naturally
we want to write this also sort of in more
traditional vector kind of form but we now
have the challenge that we have a much more
flexible approach to to vexos right so our
vectors are not always starting at one this this
thing could be you know anywhere we could have
elements over here that we might be interested in
you know it's it's a bit more variable but one way
of encoding that is to write the coefficients
down here and put some kind of marker down that
tells us where the zero spot or the zero entry is
that's what we're doing with this box here so if
we can mimic that then we're basically capturing
the same information so two three zero minus one
the same entries we could put a box around that
that three learning everyone - that's the zero
index that's the one index 2 and X minus 1 and
X and so on boxes around things maybe not always
that easy if you're going to type so maybe an
underscore is an alternative to that okay so we
could write 2 3 with an underscore 0 minus 1 and
often when we're working with vectors we like to
actually put commas because after all these
things are ordered right this is like a list
and so it's quite natural for us to put commas in
here and this is sort of almost standard practice
in certain contexts so this looks awfully like
an ordinary vector except that there's a little
underscore under the 3 to us that alerts us to
the fact that this is actually the zero index
okay the zero index is denoted by that underscore
there so this is a convention that we could use
that I think connects with the usual story but
reminds us that these kinds of things are still
just representatives or ways of expressing this
much more fundamental object which is actually
the the vessel itself which is a multi set of
Singleton's ok but what about the situation
where we have of exil with only strictly positive
Singleton's where the index entries are starting
1 2 3 4 and so on for example this one here you
we have a singleton one singleton one singleton
one some auntie singleton twos and a singleton for
the way we would ordinarily represent this in the
frieze kind of situation is to put a box around
the zero place and there's zero singleton zero so
we'll put a zero there and there's three singleton
ones minus two singleton twos no singleton three
and a single singleton four okay so to represent
this using the notation that we've just introduced
we would write a vector and put these numbers
down with commas now we put an underscore under
that zero alerting us to that that's the place
where the the zero index is now if we're in a
situation where we don't have something with a
zero index in other words we don't have any zero
Singleton's in our vessel then it's really just
more like a traditional vector then let us agree
that we'll drop that zero with a underscore and
just write three minus two zero one now it looks
like a standard familiar vector that you're
used to okay with that's the X 1 component the
X 2 component the X 3 component the X 4 component
if you like alright so this way we can touch base
with a standard story so if we have a vector like
this we'll assume that this is the first position
second position third position fourth position
and so on if we want to make sure that there is a
zeroth position we'll denote it with a special
underscore symbol some work but if there's no
such underscore then we'll assume it's kind of a
standard vector okay so that's great that means
that we can basically use the familiar language
of vectors that you'll all be familiar with but we
have to remind ourselves that we're still talking
about objects which are M sets of Singleton's
ultimately that's what the objects really are
okay so now we can look at an example very nice
two-dimensional example that will illustrate
some of these ideas about basis and dimension
in a relatively familiar vector kind of notation
using the conventions we've just established so
let's look at i span of the vectors 2 1 and -1
3 okay so this is just our short form for a Veck
so this is really the VEX ol which is a multi set
consisting of the singleton one the singleton one
and the singleton - okay but we're not always
gonna say that here we think of having two
vectors and we can picture those vectors in the
familiar way there's the vector 2 1 in the plane
and there's a vector minus 1/3 of the plane ok so
what does the eye span of this look like well it
looks like all possible linear combinations we've
seen them what that is it's like a lattice so the
intersection of these various families of parallel
lines so all these red points here these are the
elements in this eye span so there's two one and
there's minus 1/3 it's also one for this would
be 4 2 and so on ok so this thing has dimension
2 why is that well because this thing itself is
a spanning set or spanning em set and it's not
possible to find a spanning em set with just
one element if we had just one element some one
particular vector then it's eye span would be
just vectors that are only in that direction we
would get a one-dimensional thing this is a two
dimensional thing we can see that visually so not
going to have a one-dimensional basis vector so
this actually is going to be an a basis for this
this ice-pan and so the thing has dimension to so
one basis is the the am set that we have already
to begin with the M say consisting of vectors 2 1
and -1 3 given here in red and I want to explore
some other bases okay so to show you that bases
are a little bit flexible ok so moving from here
to here what have I done I've kept this one the
same and I've just replaced this one with its
negative so this vector and this vector down here
so these two vectors would also span this same
I linear space in other words if we looking at
all possible combinations of this vector in this
vector we would get exactly the same because it's
sort of obvious that this one is just negative
of this one so any integral combination of these
is going to be an integral combination of those
just with the second coefficient negated how about
this 2 1 1 4 now we're talking about this vector
and the vector 1 4 is that also the basis what
would be the span of this vector and this vector
that's an interesting question to think about that
picture would look different if we were doing that
we would say mark that in green then we would have
this vector here also in green all right so if
we just started with those two vectors and asked
what is their span well we would draw a different
kind of lattice we would still have this line here
because that's multiples of those but we'd also
have to include sort of multiples of this one
so there'd be a line going up there and in that
direction and then we'd want to consider the sum
of these two this one plus this one but that's
going to be a line that's parallel to this one
in that direction like that and then the same
thing through there'd be another line parallel
like this and over down one here another line
parallel like this another one over here so we'd
end up with these the lines that we have currently
which are sort of in this direction as well as
these new lines here be a different picture but
notably the actual points of intersection of the
lines are exactly the same as the ones that we
had in the blue story so the way of generating
the thing is different but the actual points in
the I linear space are exactly the same or to
put it another way any integral linear combination
of these two is an integral linear combination of
these two and conversely and algebraically that's
not too hard to see because this thing is just the
sum of these two right so this one is just the
sum of these two and the other way around this
one is the difference between this one and this
one so you can go from an algebraic combination
of these two to an algebraic combination of these
two in a relatively simple algebraic way showing
that the eye spans of these two m sets are the
same so these are both basis of the same linear
space how about 2 1 3 5 that'd be that 2 1 there
and where is 3 5 3 5 I guess that's 1/4 and if we
add 1/4 now I'm going to be that one there so then
we be considering these two basis vectors that one
and that one again and really the same argument
that we've just made shows that also these two
vectors would also span exactly the same so all
integral combinations of these two is the same as
all integral combinations of these two is the same
so an integral combinations of these two so that's
a good example of how we can actually get quite a
lot of different bases of the same I linear space
in these cases well the transformations have
been relatively simple it's been not too hard
to see that a linear combination of one is the
same as a linear combination of the other but
maybe things could get a little more complicated
so here's a challenge I'm going to leave you what
about these possible M sets so are any of these
going to be a basis for this same space the eye
span of these two vectors here in other words the
one that we have here so here we have 14 17 6 9
14 1779 13 17 6 9 14 1879 so if we actually drew
these vectors say this one here so we have to go
14 18 a rather big vector and 7 9 another one
there how do we tell whether the span of this
is the same as the span of this well first of all
we would certainly have to check that these two
things are actually in here but that's a necessary
condition so first we should check well does this
thing here actually belong to this space does this
thing actually belong to this space and if they
do then do they have a kind of basis property or
not so it may not be clear so I'll leave you this
is an exercise and in our next video we want to
delve into this kind of problem a little bit more
deeply this very interesting problem connects with
fundamental issues in linear algebra having to do
with row reduction having to do with row echelon
canonical forms and and Charles 4 meets normal
forms so we're we're meeting some rather serious
linear algebra ideas but actually still from a
relatively early days right we just started
think about this subject so it's interesting
that we're touching base with these important
issues almost immediately that's very cool okay
so that'll be fun I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music]